<div class="docversions"></div>
<div class="pagetoc">
<!-- toc -->
</div>

<!-- Generated by "Shake webmanuals" from hledger-ui/hledger-ui.m4.md doc/common.m4 hledger-ui/defs.m4 -->

# hledger-ui

hledger-ui - terminal interface for the hledger accounting tool

`hledger-ui [OPTIONS] [QUERYARGS]`\
`hledger ui -- [OPTIONS] [QUERYARGS]`

hledger is a reliable, cross-platform set of programs for tracking
money, time, or any other commodity, using double-entry accounting and a
simple, editable file format. hledger is inspired by and largely
compatible with ledger(1).

<style>
.highslide img {max-width:200px; border:0;}
.highslide-caption {color:white; background-color:black;}
</style>

<div style="float:right; max-width:200px; text-align:right;">

<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-acc2.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-acc2.png" title="Accounts screen with query and depth limit" /></a>
<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-acc.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-acc.png" title="Accounts screen" /></a>
<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-acc-greenterm.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-acc-greenterm.png" title="Accounts screen with greenterm theme" /></a>
<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-txn.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-txn.png" title="Transaction screen" /></a>
<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-reg.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-sample-reg.png" title="Register screen" /></a>
<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-bcexample-acc.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-bcexample-acc.png" title="beancount example accounts" /></a>
<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-bcexample-acc-etrade-cash.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-bcexample-acc-etrade-cash.png" title="beancount example's etrade cash subaccount" /></a>
<a href="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-bcexample-acc-etrade.png" class="highslide" onclick="return hs.expand(this)"><img src="/images/hledger-ui/hledger-ui-bcexample-acc-etrade.png" title="beancount example's etrade investments, all commoditiess" /></a>

</div>

hledger-ui is hledger's terminal interface, providing an efficient
full-window text UI for viewing accounts and transactions, and some
limited data entry capability. It is easier than hledger's command-line
interface, and sometimes quicker and more convenient than the web
interface.

Like hledger, it reads data from one or more files in hledger journal,
timeclock, timedot, or CSV format specified with `-f`, or
`$LEDGER_FILE`, or `$HOME/.hledger.journal` (on windows, perhaps
`C:/Users/USER/.hledger.journal`). For more about this see hledger(1),
hledger_journal(5) etc.

Unlike hledger, hledger-ui hides all future-dated transactions by
default. They can be revealed, along with any rule-generated periodic
transactions, by pressing the F key (or starting with --forecast) to
enable "forecast mode".

## OPTIONS

Note: if invoking hledger-ui as a hledger subcommand, write `--` before
options as shown above.

Any QUERYARGS are interpreted as a hledger search query which filters
the data.

`--watch`
:   watch for data and date changes and reload automatically

`--theme=default|terminal|greenterm`
:   use this custom display theme

`--register=ACCTREGEX`
:   start in the (first) matched account's register screen

`--change`
:   show period balances (changes) at startup instead of historical
    balances

`-l --flat`
:   show accounts as a flat list (default)

`-t --tree`
:   show accounts as a tree

hledger input options:

`-f FILE --file=FILE`
:   use a different input file. For stdin, use - (default:
    `$LEDGER_FILE` or `$HOME/.hledger.journal`)

`--rules-file=RULESFILE`
:   Conversion rules file to use when reading CSV (default: FILE.rules)

`--separator=CHAR`
:   Field separator to expect when reading CSV (default: ',')

`--alias=OLD=NEW`
:   rename accounts named OLD to NEW

`--anon`
:   anonymize accounts and payees

`--pivot FIELDNAME`
:   use some other field or tag for the account name

`-I --ignore-assertions`
:   disable balance assertion checks (note: does not disable balance
    assignments)

hledger reporting options:

`-b --begin=DATE`
:   include postings/txns on or after this date

`-e --end=DATE`
:   include postings/txns before this date

`-D --daily`
:   multiperiod/multicolumn report by day

`-W --weekly`
:   multiperiod/multicolumn report by week

`-M --monthly`
:   multiperiod/multicolumn report by month

`-Q --quarterly`
:   multiperiod/multicolumn report by quarter

`-Y --yearly`
:   multiperiod/multicolumn report by year

`-p --period=PERIODEXP`
:   set start date, end date, and/or reporting interval all at once
    using [period expressions](manual.html#period-expressions) syntax

`--date2`
:   match the secondary date instead (see command help for other
    effects)

`-U --unmarked`
:   include only unmarked postings/txns (can combine with -P or -C)

`-P --pending`
:   include only pending postings/txns

`-C --cleared`
:   include only cleared postings/txns

`-R --real`
:   include only non-virtual postings

`-NUM --depth=NUM`
:   hide/aggregate accounts or postings more than NUM levels deep

`-E --empty`
:   show items with zero amount, normally hidden (and vice-versa in
    hledger-ui/hledger-web)

`-B --cost`
:   convert amounts to their cost/selling amount at transaction time

`-V --market`
:   convert amounts to their market value in default valuation
    commodities

`-X --exchange=COMM`
:   convert amounts to their market value in commodity COMM

`--value`
:   convert amounts to cost or market value, more flexibly than -B/-V/-X

`--infer-value`
:   with -V/-X/--value, also infer market prices from transactions

`--auto`
:   apply [automated posting rules](journal.html#auto-postings) to
    modify transactions.

`--forecast`
:   generate future transactions from [periodic
    transaction](journal.html#periodic-transactions) rules, for the next
    6 months or till report end date. In hledger-ui, also make ordinary
    future transactions visible.

`--color=WHEN (or --colour=WHEN)`
:   Should color-supporting commands use ANSI color codes in text
    output.
:   'auto' (default): whenever stdout seems to be a color-supporting
    terminal.
:   'always' or 'yes': always, useful eg when piping output into 'less
    -R'.
:   'never' or 'no': never.
:   A NO_COLOR environment variable overrides this.

When a reporting option appears more than once in the command line, the
last one takes precedence.

Some reporting options can also be written as [query
arguments](hledger.html#queries).

hledger help options:

`-h --help`
:   show general usage (or after COMMAND, command usage)

`--version`
:   show version

`--debug[=N]`
:   show debug output (levels 1-9, default: 1)

a @file argument will be expanded to the contents of file, which should
contain one command line option/argument per line. (to prevent this,
insert a `--` argument before.)

## keys

`?` shows a help dialog listing all keys. (some of these also appear in
the quick help at the bottom of each screen.) press `?` again (or
`escape`, or `left`, or `q`) to close it. the following keys work on
most screens:

the cursor keys navigate: `right` (or `enter`) goes deeper, `left`
returns to the previous screen,
`up`/`down`/`page up`/`page down`/`home`/`end` move up and down through
lists. Emacs-style (`ctrl-p`/`ctrl-n`/`ctrl-f`/`ctrl-b`) movement keys
are also supported (but not vi-style keys, since hledger-1.19, sorry!).
A tip: movement speed is limited by your keyboard repeat rate, to move
faster you may want to adjust it. (If you're on a mac, the karabiner app
is one way to do that.)

with shift pressed, the cursor keys adjust the report period, limiting
the transactions to be shown (by default, all are shown).
`shift-down/up` steps downward and upward through these standard report
period durations: year, quarter, month, week, day. then,
`shift-left/right` moves to the previous/next period. `T` sets the
report period to today. with the `--watch` option, when viewing a
"current" period (the current day, week, month, quarter, or year), the
period will move automatically to track the current date. to set a
non-standard period, you can use `/` and a `date:` query.

`/` lets you set a general filter query limiting the data shown, using
the same [query terms](hledger.html#queries) as in hledger and
hledger-web. while editing the query, you can use [ctrl-a/e/d/k, bs,
cursor
keys](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/brick-0.7/docs/brick-widgets-edit.html#t:editor);
press `enter` to set it, or `escape`to cancel. there are also keys for
quickly adjusting some common filters like account depth and transaction
status (see below). `backspace` or `delete` removes all filters, showing
all transactions.

as mentioned above, by default hledger-ui hides future transactions -
both ordinary transactions recorded in the journal, and periodic
transactions generated by rule. `f` toggles forecast mode, in which
future/forecasted transactions are shown. *(experimental)*

`escape` resets the UI state and jumps back to the top screen, restoring
the app's initial state at startup. Or, it cancels minibuffer data entry
or the help dialog.

`ctrl-l` redraws the screen and centers the selection if possible
(selections near the top won't be centered, since we don't scroll above
the top).

`g` reloads from the data file(s) and updates the current screen and any
previous screens. (with large files, this could cause a noticeable
pause.)

`i` toggles balance assertion checking. disabling balance assertions
temporarily can be useful for troubleshooting.

`a` runs command-line hledger's add command, and reloads the updated
file. this allows some basic data entry.

`a` is like `a`, but runs the
[hledger-iadd](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hledger-iadd) tool,
which provides a terminal interface. this key will be available if
`hledger-iadd` is installed in \$path.

`e` runs \$hledger_ui_editor, or \$editor, or a default
(`emacsclient -a "" -nw`) on the journal file. with some editors (emacs,
vi), the cursor will be positioned at the current transaction when
invoked from the register and transaction screens, and at the error
location (if possible) when invoked from the error screen.

`b` toggles cost mode, showing amounts in their transaction price's
commodity (like toggling the
[`-b/--cost`](https://hledger.org/hledger.html#b-cost) flag).

`v` toggles value mode, showing amounts' current market value in their
default valuation commodity (like toggling the
[`-v/--market`](https://hledger.org/hledger.html#v-market-value) flag).
note, "current market value" means the value on the report end date if
specified, otherwise today. to see the value on another date, you can
temporarily set that as the report end date. eg: to see a transaction as
it was valued on july 30, go to the accounts or register screen, press
`/`, and add `date:-7/30` to the query.

at most one of cost or value mode can be active at once.

there's not yet any visual reminder when cost or value mode is active;
for now pressing `b` `b` `v` should reliably reset to normal mode.

with --watch active, if you save an edit to the journal file while
viewing the transaction screen in cost or value mode, the `b`/`v` keys
will stop working. to work around, press g to force a manual reload, or
exit the transaction screen.

`q` quits the application.

additional screen-specific keys are described below.

## screens

### accounts screen

this is normally the first screen displayed. it lists accounts and their
balances, like hledger's balance command. by default, it shows all
accounts and their latest ending balances (including the balances of
subaccounts). if you specify a query on the command line, it shows just
the matched accounts and the balances from matched transactions.

Account names are shown as a flat list by default; press `t` to toggle
tree mode. In list mode, account balances are exclusive of subaccounts,
except where subaccounts are hidden by a depth limit (see below). In
tree mode, all account balances are inclusive of subaccounts.

To see less detail, press a number key, `1` to `9`, to set a depth
limit. Or use `-` to decrease and `+`/`=` to increase the depth limit.
`0` shows even less detail, collapsing all accounts to a single total.
To remove the depth limit, set it higher than the maximum account depth,
or press `ESCAPE`.

`H` toggles between showing historical balances or period balances.
Historical balances (the default) are ending balances at the end of the
report period, taking into account all transactions before that date
(filtered by the filter query if any), including transactions before the
start of the report period. In other words, historical balances are what
you would see on a bank statement for that account (unless disturbed by
a filter query). Period balances ignore transactions before the report
start date, so they show the change in balance during the report period.
They are more useful eg when viewing a time log.

`U` toggles filtering by [unmarked status](journal.html#status),
including or excluding unmarked postings in the balances. Similarly, `P`
toggles pending postings, and `C` toggles cleared postings. (By default,
balances include all postings; if you activate one or two status
filters, only those postings are included; and if you activate all
three, the filter is removed.)

`R` toggles real mode, in which [virtual
postings](journal.html#virtual-postings) are ignored.

`Z` toggles nonzero mode, in which only accounts with nonzero balances
are shown (hledger-ui shows zero items by default, unlike command-line
hledger).

Press `right` or `enter` to view an account's transactions register.

### Register screen

This screen shows the transactions affecting a particular account, like
a check register. Each line represents one transaction and shows:

-   the other account(s) involved, in abbreviated form. (If there are
    both real and virtual postings, it shows only the accounts affected
    by real postings.)

-   the overall change to the current account's balance; positive for an
    inflow to this account, negative for an outflow.

-   the running historical total or period total for the current
    account, after the transaction. This can be toggled with `H`.
    Similar to the accounts screen, the historical total is affected by
    transactions (filtered by the filter query) before the report start
    date, while the period total is not. If the historical total is not
    disturbed by a filter query, it will be the running historical
    balance you would see on a bank register for the current account.

Transactions affecting this account's subaccounts will be included in
the register if the accounts screen is in tree mode, or if it's in list
mode but this account has subaccounts which are not shown due to a depth
limit. In other words, the register always shows the transactions
contributing to the balance shown on the accounts screen. Tree mode/list
mode can be toggled with `t` here also.

`U` toggles filtering by [unmarked status](journal.html#status), showing
or hiding unmarked transactions. Similarly, `P` toggles pending
transactions, and `C` toggles cleared transactions. (By default,
transactions with all statuses are shown; if you activate one or two
status filters, only those transactions are shown; and if you activate
all three, the filter is removed.)

`R` toggles real mode, in which [virtual
postings](journal.html#virtual-postings) are ignored.

`Z` toggles nonzero mode, in which only transactions posting a nonzero
change are shown (hledger-ui shows zero items by default, unlike
command-line hledger).

Press `right` (or `enter`) to view the selected transaction in detail.

### Transaction screen

This screen shows a single transaction, as a general journal entry,
similar to hledger's print command and journal format
(hledger_journal(5)).

The transaction's date(s) and any cleared flag, transaction code,
description, comments, along with all of its account postings are shown.
Simple transactions have two postings, but there can be more (or in
certain cases, fewer).

`up` and `down` will step through all transactions listed in the
previous account register screen. In the title bar, the numbers in
parentheses show your position within that account register. They will
vary depending on which account register you came from (remember most
transactions appear in multiple account registers). The \#N number
preceding them is the transaction's position within the complete
unfiltered journal, which is a more stable id (at least until the next
reload).

### Error screen

This screen will appear if there is a problem, such as a parse error,
when you press g to reload. Once you have fixed the problem, press g
again to reload and resume normal operation. (Or, you can press escape
to cancel the reload attempt.)

## ENVIRONMENT

**COLUMNS** The screen width to use. Default: the full terminal width.

**LEDGER_FILE** The journal file path when not specified with `-f`.
Default: `~/.hledger.journal` (on windows, perhaps
`C:/Users/USER/.hledger.journal`).

A typical value is `~/DIR/YYYY.journal`, where DIR is a
version-controlled finance directory and YYYY is the current year. Or
`~/DIR/current.journal`, where current.journal is a symbolic link to
YYYY.journal.

On Mac computers, you can set this and other environment variables in a
more thorough way that also affects applications started from the GUI
(say, an Emacs dock icon). Eg on MacOS Catalina I have a
`~/.MacOSX/environment.plist` file containing

    {
      "LEDGER_FILE" : "~/finance/current.journal"
    }

To see the effect you may need to `killall Dock`, or reboot.

## FILES

Reads data from one or more files in hledger journal, timeclock,
timedot, or CSV format specified with `-f`, or `$LEDGER_FILE`, or
`$HOME/.hledger.journal` (on windows, perhaps
`C:/Users/USER/.hledger.journal`).

## BUGS

The need to precede options with `--` when invoked from hledger is
awkward.

`-f-` doesn't work (hledger-ui can't read from stdin).

`-V` affects only the accounts screen.

When you press `g`, the current and all previous screens are
regenerated, which may cause a noticeable pause with large files. Also
there is no visual indication that this is in progress.

`--watch` is not yet fully robust. It works well for normal usage, but
many file changes in a short time (eg saving the file thousands of times
with an editor macro) can cause problems at least on OSX. Symptoms
include: unresponsive UI, periodic resetting of the cursor position,
momentary display of parse errors, high CPU usage eventually subsiding,
and possibly a small but persistent build-up of CPU usage until the
program is restarted.

Also, if you are viewing files mounted from another machine, `--watch`
requires that both machine clocks are roughly in step.
